these are personal notice i want to jot down based on issues
i encounter when developing the application


when i added the new service device service into 
my folder parent directory Home energy microservices
hence having two spring boot project in the folder


my package declaration was marked as does not exist
and the imports do not work. it seems java is not working
in the device service.

the issue has to do with my ide workspace folder. i now have
two maven projects. the ide does not recognise the device-service 
as a maven project

i had to make my ide update the workspace
Ctrl+Shift+P and running Java: Clean Java Language Server Workspace


I keep having permission issues with docker volumes and 
Serve command failed: failed to initialize catalog: 

object store error: 
ObjectStore(Generic { 
    store: "LocalFileSystem", 
    source: UnableToCreateDir { 
        source: Os { code: 13, kind: PermissionDenied, message: "Permission denied" }, 
        path: "/var/lib/influxdb3/data/node0/catalog/v3" 
        } 
    }
)

this error says, the docker container user for influxdb3 is not about to create 
a director of the path highlights.

why is that. 


Container by default lose the data we store in them when they are removed.
To prevent us from losing the data stored in them, every time we restarts the container,
we need a persistent storage for our data in the container.

Docker volumes is a persistent data store for container. It means 
docker create a directory on our host machine for a container data storage.

when a volumes is attached to a container, it reads and store data in that volume/ directory,
the data is persisted as long as the directory exists.

the issue now is docker creates the directory / volumes has a root user. meaning 
it is the owner of the directory has reads to modify it .

the influxDb container also uses a non root user to run this command as the first thing it 
does.
to create subdirectory (
    command:
      - influxdb3
      - serve
      - --node-id=node0
      - --object-store=file
      - --data-dir=/var/lib/influxdb3/data
      - --plugin-dir=/var/lib/influxdb3/plugins
) in 
a directory that is not owned by it. hence it is not permissed because it is not his.

to solve this i changed the influxDB container's user to root. 
which is less secured but a fastest way to be unblocked. hence it create create the subdirectory
because it owns it 


summary 
volume created by docker root → InfluxDB runs as non-root → 
non-root can't write into root-owned dir → 
switched to user: root to bypass the check.


So to add authentication to my backend api endpoints, with protected endpoints
every request must have a request header with bearer token that identifies a user 
and authenticates the request.

In a simple application backend api, i will have an endpoint like /login
where the user will send their credentials, verify they are existing user and
generate a jwt token for the which there can add to every subsequent request to the backend endpoints.

Jwt are small data packages in json format that is crypographically signed with a private key, 
containing user details like id, roles, permission etc.
The the jwt is in this format <header>.<payload>.<signature>

The headers and payload can be easily decode. the most important part is the signature. 
the signature is where we verify that the jwt was signed by the us. 

Now with my user identity and authentication, i am entrusting a third party service, keycloack 
to handle it. keycloack become my Authentication Server
so my users will interact with keycloack and once they are authenticated with them, 
keycloack give them an access token, that is a jwt token with the signature signed by their private key.

my backend becomes the resource server side note thats why i have 
this dependency <dependency>
			<groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
			<artifactId>spring-boot-starter-security-oauth2-resource-server</artifactId>
		</dependency>

and i recieve request with headers containing the jwt token. 


now the most important part is to verify the token was from keycloack using the signature part of the token.
Because keycloack signs jwt with their private key. all i need is their public key to verify the token 
was signed my truster authentication provider keycloack. 

how do i get the public key, 
1. i can manually copy the private key in my environment and use it to verify the signature,
problems with that is keycloack changes their private keys frequently hence i have to update it frequently
and it not feasible.

the best approach to get the public keys is through keycloacks Json web key sets endpoint.
keycloack exposes an endpoint where i can get the public keys to verify token signed by their private keys.

once i get the public key from key cloack, i can verify the signature and decode the header and payload
easily with base64encoding. 

now the user is authenticated to access resources in my application. 







Now shifting our focus to our users and their interaction with keycloack.


what happens before the user is given a JWT to be sent to the backend.

To understand it we first need to understand these protocols Oauth2 and openid connect used for authentication.

Oauth2 is a protocol where users grants a third party application, access to its data in a particular service.
without sharing their password.

for eg, a user has contact saved in google, and external application needs access to them.
the user can grant access to that external application without giving them their password to google.
throught oauth2.

a simple flow will be 
- the external app will have a sign in with google button
- the user clicks on the button, and he is redirect to google to sign in.
- once done a consent page shows up with a list of permissions the external application
is requesting access to. 
- the eternal app made a initial request with a list of scopes eg, contacts:get, contacts:delete
- once the user, agrees, the external app is give an authorization code
- sends to the authorization code back to the google for an access token
- the external app can use the access token to access these resource.

openid connect is an extension of oauth2, oauth2 is not designed for authentication, but 
for permissions and scope hences using it only is bad for authentication.

openid connect extends by adds openid to the scope, the external app sends 
- after the user consents, an access token, a id token and a /userinfo endpoint 
is sent to the external app.
- the id token is jwt of the user and /userinfo contains more information of that user.

keycloack is and identity and access management service which supports oauth2 and openid connect (oidc),

- our fronted has a sign in with keycloack 
- our frontend send redirect user with a request that has a scope of openid to keycloack server,
- user authenticates and a authorization code is sent to our frontend,
- frontend exchanges the authorization code for access token and  id token which are jwts
- frontend sends access token jwt to our backend api.





so shifting focues to client and keycloack interactions
oauth2 and openid connect are protocols to authenticate our application

So now we need a way the user can interact with keycloack, and generate jwt for the client

what ever client we create like a frontend with using
it will use oauth2 and openid connect protocols to authenticate the application.

Oauth2 Open Authorization 


When our users interact with keycloack, they will have their data like their profile details, 
password with them. 

now my client application will need permission from the user to request those data from keycloack.
the protocol that allows other client, a third party application to request data of a user from 
other service without sharing their password is Oauth2 (Open Authorization 2)

our client can be a frontend application with a sign in with keycloack button, or postman since 
we are developing a backend apis currently. our client will have to be registered with keycloack.

a simple flow will be 
a user clicks on log in with keycloack. from my client application, the browser redirect
them to keycloack where they have to sign in.

after that there is a consent page that list the kind of data our frontend will be requesting from 
keycloack called (scopes) if we were dealing with google as an example
the scope will be contacts:get, contacts:update, etc.
a scope will openid 

in the case of keycloack our scope will only be openid:true.

in a frontend, it will list the scopes the user should allow access to, 
the user will have to grant permission, 


once the user consents, an authorization code will be given to our frontend, 
the frontend sends it back to the keycloack in exchange for an access token. 

now our frontend can use the access token to request data of the user from keycloack 
and keycloack with grant them access. keycloack only grants access to resource within the scope 
the access token was. anything outside the scope will not be allowed. 


openid connect is an extension of oauth2 where we can ask for id token and /userinfo endpoint in 
adding to the access token, 

the id token is the jwt token with information about the user. 


Our  will have its data with keycloack , because we have introduce them in our application, 
i will 




why third party 
security is a very hard concept to handle 
as technology evolves, there are many ways i system can be hacked,
when why not introduces experts who i constant battling and working on 
security to handle security for my applications. 


observability

The actuator provides a series of built-in endpoints to display performance information 
about the running application, such as health, metrics, and more. 

The Micrometer Prometheus registry then formats these metrics into a Prometheus-readable format.

https://medium.com/simform-engineering/revolutionize-monitoring-empowering-spring-boot-applications-with-prometheus-and-grafana-e99c5c7248cf


https://medium.com/@dinesharney/part-1-who-are-you-understanding-authentication-in-simple-terms-08ba0a71fef2

https://www.reddit.com/r/webdev/comments/zxic71/what_are_the_benefits_of_using_a_3rd_party_for/

https://medium.com/israeli-tech-radar/oauth-2-0-and-openid-connect-for-dummies-6fa6e995d6d5
